Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Anne.
One of today's most popular and prolific science fiction authors is Fred Saberhagen.
Saberhagen is best known for two series.
One is a five novel set on Dracula.
The other consists of a novel and over 30 stories on the Berserkers.
As with many other science fiction writers, Saberhagen began by reading it.
When I was very young, when I was eight or nine years old, I came upon this old pulp
magazine, secondhand magazine someplace, and there were a couple of stories and they really
impressed me.
I think they scared the daylights out of me, actually.
And magazines of that kind were prohibited for a while from being brought into the house.
Then I just kind of went away from it for a few years.
When I was about sixteen, I started haunting the secondhand magazine shops, which they
then had in Chicago, and picking up old copies of Astounding, which as it was then called.
And then I didn't really get into writing until later on I was in the Air Force in my
twenties, and I had a lot of time on my hands.
I would make a stab at it now and then.
And still, I guess I didn't have access to a typewriter and all this privacy and so on.
And still nothing really came of it.
And I was in, see I was almost thirty before I actually sat down and seriously wrote a story
and really typed out the manuscript properly and got it, sent it off to be sold.
Saber Hagen has some interesting thoughts on science fiction in its relation to mainstream
or regular literature.
I guess when you say mainstream, I guess I'm coming to think more and more of mainstream
as a kind of an offshoot of writing or literature, whatever you call it, where you're limited
to things that could only happen with a high probability in the next block or in the next
two months or something like that.
And I think if you look back historically, most of the literature has really been wide
open.
You're allowed to use ghosts.
You're allowed to use other planets.
You can do all these things.
We've somehow turned this around and put this in its own little ghetto, but I think it really
should be the other way.
Sometimes the border between mainstream literature, the kind that deals with everyday reality,
and science fiction becomes vague.
Reality can catch up with science fiction quickly.
Saber Hagen uses one of his own books, Octagon, published in 1981, to point this out.
And it's probably as close to a mainstream thing as I've ever done.
It's set in the very near future, and it's largely about computers and programming and
people who play games with computers.
And I guess when I started to write it, it was still science fiction, and by the time
it's published it may be just a little out of date even, I don't know.
Saber Hagen talks about Dracula and the Berserkers, two of his most popular creations.
I think what's got the biggest reader response by far is the Dracula books I've done.
I get more letters and mail and sometimes more money for one of those than for all of
the Berserkers.
The Berserkers have been around a long time, and a lot of people have picked up on them
over the years, but they're not really what sells the most books now.
We'll have more on Fred Saber Hagen tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Fred Saber Hagen has been a professional science fiction author for some 17 years.
His output is notable for its variety.
Even though he writes typical science fiction, good science fiction such as the popular Berserkers
series, he tries related areas too.
Well, I like to change back and forth.
I think I get a little tired of doing whatever it is I'm doing after a long book, and then
I like to do something as different as I can find from that.
One of his novels that varies from straight science fiction is The Huge Empire of the East,
a story with the characteristics of science fantasy.
Originally there were three books, The Broken Lands, Black Mountains, and Changeling Earth.
And they came out some years earlier with split up among two different publishers as it happened,
the way problems of publishing and everything being of what they are.
Magic works in The Empire of the East and sorcery is an occupation.
And this is so because the structure of atoms has been changed, making nuclear power and technology impossible.
But at the novel's end there's a tremendous battle between inhuman forces.
One is Orcus, a demon power that represents the irrational into magic.
The other is Ardna, a super machine which has gathered enough strength to challenge the magical foundation of the world.
The result of the battle is a balance.
Technology and magic will coexist.
The world was changing again and at least for a time both of these kinds of powers would be functional.
In 1976, Saber Hagen published a horror story in the classic tradition,
a mysterious house, an unknown force haunting it, a family buying the house and moving in.
The book is Specimens.
Kind of a fun story if you can call it that, of a menace to be overcome.
The old house in the story by the way really exists in Lombard, or dead a few years ago.
When we lived in Chicago we were looking for houses in the area there and that was one that we looked at.
The power haunting the house is an alien living beneath it.
It's been there for centuries, even before the house was built, capturing humans as specimens.
It was an attempt to write a good Grade B movie plot and nobody has bought it yet to make a good Grade B movie,
but there's a new Ace Edition coming out in a few months here and maybe somebody will.
Another facet of Saber Hagen's variety is seen in a little known satire, Love Conquers All, which came out in 1974.
It extrapolates strongly from present social trends and in that sense is reminiscent of Paul and Cornbluth's advertising classic, The Space Merchants.
But Saber Hagen extrapolates from something very different than advertising.
I guess it was the controversy about abortion and sex and things were bombarded, questions were faced with all the time here.
And I just tried to, you know, one of the traditional science fiction writers' viewpoint, take a look at everything, turn everything inside out and see how it looks from the other point of view.
In Love Conquers All, Saber Hagen totally reverses all our present attitudes towards sex and love.
The book presents a world in which a wife should have affairs, in which virginity is horrifying.
And as a clever touch, the curses people use are words like purity and chastity.
We asked Saber Hagen if the book had a message. Was it satire? Was he on a soapbox?
No, I think that's your department really. Whether it's satire or what it is, I think I've done my job when I've written it.
So I wouldn't say you're wrong. Classify it however you will.
Tomorrow, more of Fred Saber Hagen.
Coming up next is the science fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the science fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lange.
Dracula, the fearsome vampire of legend and myth. You wouldn't think anything new could be written on him.
But science fiction author Fred Saber Hagen thought otherwise. So far he's written five novels on Dracula.
The Dracula tape is the first one, which is a recounting of the original Ram Stoker's original Dracula story.
Only seen from the point of view of the count. And there's Holmes Dracula and an old friend of the family and Thorne, which is out now.
Since we spoke with Saber Hagen, the fifth book in the series, Dominion, has come out. We ask him how he got interested in Dracula.
Well, it started, I just sat down one day and just for fun. I wanted to reread the original Dracula, which I had read once before, years earlier.
And I think it's not all that good a book really, apart from this titanic devilish central character.
But it struck me more and more as I read through it that Dracula was hardly ever on stage.
And this thing, everybody's talking about him and he's almost always off somewhere doing something. Nobody quite knows what.
So I guess maybe I had Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead on my mind or something like that.
But I just thought, what would it look like from the chief villains point of view?
So off I went. It was awful lot of fun to write and it just seemed to go right along.
The first book was the Dracula tape published in 1975.
In this novel, Dracula is telling what really happened to Lucy, Professor Van Helsing and Jonathan, the characters from the Brahms Stoker novel.
As it turns out, the count is a victim of circumstances and Van Helsing is a demented loony.
In Saberhagen's account, the vampire almost never kills anyone. He just takes a court to go.
It was Van Helsing who was accidentally killing the victims by giving them blood transfusions from persons whose blood type didn't match.
And readers liked it. It was something different, Dracula from the vampire's point of view.
And Saberhagen had something different, even unique, for the sequel, entitled The Holmes Dracula File.
The time came to think about doing a sequel for it.
And it occurred to me that nobody had ever put Holmes and Dracula in the same book up to that point as far as I knew.
And it seemed to me they, this would be very interesting.
It's as if they represented the two sides of the human psyche or the intellect and the dark side.
And here they were, they were contemporaries. They were in the same city, in the same year.
And everybody knew about them both and still they'd never, they just completely missed each other.
So I decided I had to try to make contact there someplace.
Can Saberhagen's Dracula material be considered science fiction? Its popularity is obvious, but does it attract science fiction readers or some other type?
Sometimes you see it on the fantasy shelf in the bookstore. Sometimes you see it in occult.
Sometimes you see it on the new shelf or only the zombies and haunted babies and all these modern recent things appear.
I don't really care as long as people are reading it.
I don't know if they're science fiction readers. Some of them think they're vampires.
You get a pretty good, maybe some of them are vampires.
How do the Dracula books compare with Saberhagen's other books in terms of reader response?
I think what's got the biggest reader response by far is the Dracula books I've done.
I get more, more letters and mail and sometimes more money.
We'll have more on Fred Saberhagen tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show
Next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
In the worlds of science fiction, the deadliest enemies man has to face are the berserkers of Fred Saberhagen.
The berserkers are machines, highly intelligent machines that are able to reproduce and to repair themselves endlessly.
They come in all sizes, from immense globes the size of worlds to robots or androids that simulate human beings.
And they are all deadly killing machines. Each berserker is programmed to do one thing and one thing only to seek out and destroy all life.
Author Saberhagen discusses the origin of the term.
Of course the berserkers historically are the Norse warriors who would go mad and run around killing people until they were killed.
And I don't know why it just seemed to come along with the original concept and I used it.
The berserkers originated far in the past before humanity had achieved technology or space travel.
There had been two super races engaged in interstellar war. One of them had produced and programmed the berserkers machines to annihilate its enemies.
Now the two warring races have vanished but the berserkers remain, fulfilling their function of searching out and destroying all forms of life.
Saberhagen recalls when he wrote his first berserker story.
I was writing, let's see back very early, in the early 1960s.
I was writing short stories, most of which were being published in Galaxy or Worlds of If, Worlds of Tomorrow, Fred Poles, the editor then.
And I had this good idea for a short kind of a puzzle short story.
And I got about halfway through the story and I said, well what sort of a villain will I have?
And I said, I know what sort of villain I'll have. I'll have this giant robotic spaceship, 50 miles in diameter, et cetera, et cetera.
And it just, I just looked around and there it was.
Saberhagen's editor, Frederick Pole, liked the berserker idea.
Fred Pole really liked the berserker. He didn't, he bought the story. He wasn't all that crazy about the story, but he liked the berserker.
And he said, why don't you do some more berserkers? Have somebody go on one of these things and so on.
And it's just there for a while about all I wrote was berserkers.
Since the 60s, Saberhagen has written some 30 berserker stories for various science fiction magazines.
Most have been collected in four volumes.
Berserker, The Ultimate Enemy, Berserker Man, and The Berserker Wars.
And he's also written one berserker novel, Brother Assassin.
Many of the berserker stories are related with recurring characters or settings.
They are also spread over a huge span of time, thousands of years, so that Saberhagen can experiment with different human cultures and technologies.
As mankind battles, it's seemingly unstoppable enemy.
We asked Saberhagen if he had worked out a precise future history or timeline for the berserker material.
What I've tried to do is just always leave plenty of room in every direction.
I have this war going on for thousands of years and over at least a good part of the galaxy.
And I've never really, I guess if you asked me about two different stories, I could probably tell you which one was supposed to come ahead of the other one.
But I just wanted to avoid being too limited.
Fred Poe thought I was about to wipe out all the berserkers there at one point.
I did a story called Stone Place where this huge berserker fleet was destroyed.
But I took care that some of them got away at least.
The berserkers haven't been destroyed, so the battle is still going on.
But Saberhagen isn't sure he'll do any more stories on the material.
Right now I don't have any special urge to write another berserker story.
And I don't know if I ever will or not.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.